src/week8/1-cellular-automata.rst, before:

=================
Cellular Automata
=================

A cellular automaton is a discrete model of computation consisting of a regular
grid of cells, each of which can be in one of a finite number of states. Rules can be
applied to every cell in the grid to determine how the grid updates over time. Generally,
rules don't change and aren't random.

.. figure:: ../_static/images/week8/Gospers_glider_gun-light.gif
    :figwidth: 50%
    :figclass: only-light float-right

    "Gosper's glider gun", an infinite loop in Conway's Game of Life.
    *By Lucas Vieira - Own work, CC BY-SA 3.0,* |glider-gun|_

.. figure:: ../_static/images/week8/Gospers_glider_gun-dark.gif
    :figwidth: 50%
    :figclass: only-dark float-right

    "Gosper's glider gun", an infinite loop in Conway's Game of Life.
    *By Lucas Vieira - Own work, CC BY-SA 3.0,* |glider-gun|_

Stacking Conway's Game of Life
==============================

One of the most common examples of cellular automata is Conway's Game of Life, where
grid cells are either "dead" or "alive", and the grid updates according to the following
rules each iteration:

#. Living cells with two or three living neighbors remain alive, all other living cells
   die.
#. Dead cells with exactly three living neighbors become alive, all other dead cells
   remain dead.

The "neighborhood" of a cell (i.e. the set of cells that are considered neighbors of
any given cell) can be whatever you want, but in the Game of Life, the neighborhood of
a cell is the 4 cells up, down, left, and right, and the 4 diagonally connected cells.
This is called the `Moore neighborhood <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moore_neighborhood>`__
and is not the only possible option.

The Game of Life is played on an infinite or toroidal (boundary-wrapping) grid, where
you can choose any initial state. The game plays itself, updating the grid indefinitely
for you to see what your initial state gives rise to.

On it's own, the Game of Life doesn't create any sort of designs, as it's emphasis is
more on showing an animation of sorts. That being said, it's possible to convert these
"animations" into a 3D volume by stacking each iteration on top of its predecessor, creating
a 3D voxel grid.

.. figure:: ../_static/images/week8/pulsar-light.gif
    :figwidth: 48%
    :figclass: only-light float-left
    :width: 75%

    "Pulsar", an oscillator of period 3.

.. figure:: ../_static/images/week8/pulsar-dark.gif
    :figwidth: 48%
    :figclass: only-dark float-left
    :width: 75%

    "Pulsar", an oscillator of period 3.

.. figure:: ../_static/images/week8/pulsar-stack.png
    :figwidth: 48%
    :figclass: float-right

    A 3D-stacked pulsar.

.. rst-class:: clear-left clear-right

.. raw:: html

    <br>

Oscillators create stacks that could extend upwards infinitely with a repeating pattern,
but many initial configurations lead to a finite number of steps before a steady state
is reached, such as with two gliders on a toroidal surface that crash into each other.

.. figure:: ../_static/images/week8/glider-crash-initial-light.svg
    :figwidth: 48%
    :figclass: only-light float-left
    :width: 75%

    Two gliders on a toroidal grid.

.. figure:: ../_static/images/week8/glider-crash-initial-dark.svg
    :figwidth: 48%
    :figclass: only-dark float-left
    :width: 75%

    Two gliders on a toroidal grid.

.. figure:: ../_static/images/week8/glider-crash-stack.png
    :figwidth: 48%
    :figclass: float-right

    The stack created by the two gliders crashing.

.. rst-class:: clear-left clear-right

.. admonition:: RLE code for crashing gliders

    You can paste the following RLE code into https://conwaylife.com/ to see the evolution
    of the initial state.

    .. code-block:: none

        x = 6, y = 6, rule = B3/S23:T9,9
        3b3o$5bo$4bo$b2o$obo$2bo!

Conway's Game of Life is just one example of cellular automata. Choosing different types
of rules, boundary conditions, and grid types will allow us to create wildly different
results. You'll be implementing a simpler version of cellular automata for
:doc:`../assignments/4-elementary-cellular-automaton`. Updating rules partway through
the iterations or randomly selecting which rule to apply for each case can also create
interesting affects.

.. |glider-gun| replace:: *https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=101736*
.. _glider-gun: https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=101736

Commit message:

Add life-stack.gh with instructions

src/week8/1-cellular-automata.rst, after:

=================
Cellular Automata
=================

A cellular automaton is a discrete model of computation consisting of a regular
grid of cells, each of which can be in one of a finite number of states. Rules can be
applied to every cell in the grid to determine how the grid updates over time. Generally,
rules don't change and aren't random.

.. figure:: ../_static/images/week8/Gospers_glider_gun-light.gif
    :figwidth: 50%
    :figclass: only-light float-right

    "Gosper's glider gun", an infinite loop in Conway's Game of Life.
    *By Lucas Vieira - Own work, CC BY-SA 3.0,* |glider-gun|_

.. figure:: ../_static/images/week8/Gospers_glider_gun-dark.gif
    :figwidth: 50%
    :figclass: only-dark float-right

    "Gosper's glider gun", an infinite loop in Conway's Game of Life.
    *By Lucas Vieira - Own work, CC BY-SA 3.0,* |glider-gun|_

Stacking Conway's Game of Life
==============================

One of the most common examples of cellular automata is Conway's Game of Life, where
grid cells are either "dead" or "alive", and the grid updates according to the following
rules each iteration:

#. Living cells with two or three living neighbors remain alive, all other living cells
   die.
#. Dead cells with exactly three living neighbors become alive, all other dead cells
   remain dead.

The "neighborhood" of a cell (i.e. the set of cells that are considered neighbors of
any given cell) can be whatever you want, but in the Game of Life, the neighborhood of
a cell is the 4 cells up, down, left, and right, and the 4 diagonally connected cells.
This is called the `Moore neighborhood <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moore_neighborhood>`__
and is not the only possible option.

The Game of Life is played on an infinite or toroidal (boundary-wrapping) grid, where
you can choose any initial state. The game plays itself, updating the grid indefinitely
for you to see what your initial state gives rise to.

On it's own, the Game of Life doesn't create any sort of designs, as it's emphasis is
more on showing an animation of sorts. That being said, it's possible to convert these
"animations" into a 3D volume by stacking each iteration on top of its predecessor, creating
a 3D voxel grid.

.. figure:: ../_static/images/week8/pulsar-light.gif
    :figwidth: 48%
    :figclass: only-light float-left
    :width: 75%

    "Pulsar", an oscillator of period 3.

.. figure:: ../_static/images/week8/pulsar-dark.gif
    :figwidth: 48%
    :figclass: only-dark float-left
    :width: 75%

    "Pulsar", an oscillator of period 3.

.. figure:: ../_static/images/week8/pulsar-stack.png
    :figwidth: 48%
    :figclass: float-right

    A 3D-stacked pulsar.

.. rst-class:: clear-left clear-right

.. raw:: html

    <br>

Oscillators create stacks that could extend upwards infinitely with a repeating pattern,
but many initial configurations lead to a finite number of steps before a steady state
is reached, such as with two gliders on a toroidal surface that crash into each other.

.. figure:: ../_static/images/week8/glider-crash-initial-light.svg
    :figwidth: 48%
    :figclass: only-light float-left
    :width: 75%

    Two gliders on a toroidal grid.

.. figure:: ../_static/images/week8/glider-crash-initial-dark.svg
    :figwidth: 48%
    :figclass: only-dark float-left
    :width: 75%

    Two gliders on a toroidal grid.

.. figure:: ../_static/images/week8/glider-crash-stack.png
    :figwidth: 48%
    :figclass: float-right

    The stack created by the two gliders crashing.

.. rst-class:: clear-left clear-right

.. admonition:: RLE code for crashing gliders

    You can paste the following RLE code into https://conwaylife.com/ to see the evolution
    of the initial state.

    .. code-block:: none

        x = 6, y = 6, rule = B3/S23:T9,9
        3b3o$5bo$4bo$b2o$obo$2bo!

Conway's Game of Life is just one example of cellular automata. Choosing different types
of rules, boundary conditions, and grid types will allow us to create wildly different
results. You'll be implementing a simpler version of cellular automata for
:doc:`../assignments/4-elementary-cellular-automaton`. Updating rules partway through
the iterations or randomly selecting which rule to apply for each case can also create
interesting affects.

.. dropdown:: Using the Grasshopper Script
    :open:
    :name: life-stack

    You can download the Grasshopper script used to create the images shown above here:
    :download:`life-stack.gh <../_static/grasshopper-files/life-stack.gh>`. To use it,
    go to a "Life Viewer" website, including https://conwaylife.com/ or https://lazyslug.com/lifeviewer/.

    Once there, make sure you update the rule used in the website to include a toroidal
    grid. To do this, select the settings icon at the bottom right, click "Pattern",
    then "Change Rule". This should display a popup that has a text entry box. Inside the
    box, put in ``Life:T10,10``. This will update the rule to the Game of Life rule with
    a toroidal 10x10 grid. If you'd like to use a differently sized grid, set the rule
    to ``Life:Tx,y``, where ``x`` is the horizontal width and ``y`` is the vertical height
    of the grid. The Python 3 component in the Grasshopper file won't work without the
    toroidal grid defined.

    From here, draw whatever you want in the grey box (you'll need to select the pencil
    tool instead of the pan tool in the top left). When you've gotten something you like,
    select everything (CTRL+A), then copy (CTRL+C). Paste it into the Panel component in
    the Grasshopper script, and it should work. You can also adjust the number of
    generations to display. If, at any point, a generation is computed with all cells
    set to dead, the script terminates early.

    One thing to note: these life viewer websites don't encode information about where
    the pattern is placed inside the toroidal grid. The websites default to centering
    the pattern within the grid, even if the pattern you drew wasn't centered. The Grasshopper
    script does the same, but you can specify X and Y offsets, if you'd like.

.. |glider-gun| replace:: *https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=101736*
.. _glider-gun: https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=101736
